[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Colony collapse disorder is
a bill we are getting for all we
have done to the bees.
It's just a name that
was given to a phenomenon
that a hive is found empty.
Food is there, honey is
there, but the bees are gone.
The first thing we look for
is, who is the cause for that?
Who is responsible?
We are not going to
solve the problem
by us killing a virus, or
a bacteria, or a fungi,
because the problem
is an inner one.
Personally, I am
grateful for a crisis.
The crisis will give us the
possibility to learn something
if we are willing.
If the heart opens up enough
to tell the mind something.
>> If we didn't have bees
to pollinate our crops,
we'd have to eat just bread
and oatmeal all the time,
and a couple of nuts.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The honeybee is important,
because we depend on it
to pollinate 40% of our food.
A tremendous amount
of what we eat.
So that's to say four of every
10 bites of food you consume,
you would not consume if not
for the work of the honeybee.
>> We have lost in this
country alone, in America,
about 5 million colonies,
each one of them having 20,000
to 50,000, 60,000
individual honeybees.
The bees are always telling
us all kinds of things
that we have to learn, and
they are giving us messages.
And their crisis is
our crisis, definitely.
We could call it colony collapse
disorder of the human being,
too.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Look.
Full honey.
Full, full, full honey.
With a little chance maybe
we can see the queen.
But you see, I feel yet
that we have a chance.
This queen is so marvelous.
Is so marvelous.
I am full in love
for this queen.
In all the story of
the bees, as bees
are in the world since
150 million years old,
the beginning of the
meeting human being and bees
it is about 10,000 years.
And the cooperation
slowly begins.
This cooperation developed,
and from hunter of honey,
human beings slowly
begin beekeeper.
Beekeepers, they
are choosen by bees.
And you see my mustache?
You can brush.
You can brush by mustache.
And they like.
They like.
>> The honeybee was
considered a sacred animal.
And the sacredness came
out of that knowledge
that the honeybee is one of
the great nurturers of life
and fertility.
The honeybee came out
of the mystery centers,
places where there were
initiates and leaders
of mankind, who
guided, and imposed,
and inspired the various
civilizations that we have.
The ancient Indian.
The ancient Persian.
The Greco-Roman civilization.
The Egyptian-Babylonian
civilization.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If you think that they opened
up the tombs of Tutankhamen,
and honey that was 2,000
years old is still edible.
There is a reverence to bees.
There is also a
reference to the gods.
Now, don't you
think, in some way,
that we should actually
be revering them?
Because they're actually
keeping us alive as
opposed to the other way around.
They're absolutely
beautiful creatures.
They're God's creatures.
And if we don't protect
them, then we're
not protecting ourselves.
Look, there we go.
>> Honey was considered so
sacred as a gift from the bees,
that honey was not sold
until the end of the 19th
or into the 20th century.
Most of the honey was
given away as a gift.
It is one of the most beneficial
and healing substances
that we can imagine.
It has enzymes,
it has nutrients,
it has trace minerals, and
it has forces of the hexagon.
The silica force is in it.
And silica is a substance
in the Earth's mantle.
About half of the
Earth's mantle is silica.
The silica in us is mainly
in the sense organs.
It is the sensing for what
goes on in the surrounding.
So the silica and the honey
have a beneficial influence
on our evolution.
Mainly from the
19th century on, we
have gone into controlling
nature more and more,
and we have lost that
feeling for the sacredness.
Steiner gave lectures to the
workers at the Goetheanum
in 1923, and Steiner said
yes, this mechanization
of beekeeping,
this realm of life,
is becoming mechanized
and industrialized.
And that will eventually
destroy beekeeping.
And the honeybee might not
survive the end of the century,
that is, the 20th century.
So now with the colony
collapse disorder,
it's clear that Steiner's
prediction has come true.
And as Steiner said, our very
lives depend on beekeeping.
Everybody should be
interested in beekeeping.
Our lives depend on it.
Look at the beautiful honey.
So I feel that we are
seeing changes in climate,
but I think the colony
collapse disorder
and the disappearance
of the honeybee
is a much more pressing
urgent problem to solve.
A lot of rationalization,
a lot of mechanization
has gone into beekeeping
to make it profitable.
And that has brought down
the honeybee in its vitality,
in its house.
>> It's financial.
Financial.
We're accepting things that
aren't ideal for the bees,
because we have to for the
business that we're in.
And we're in the business
to stay in business,
so we have to do it.
You're going to take 10.
He's going to take 14
when you're done here.
We are a mobile industry.
We run hundreds of thousands
of miles every year.
Without the almond growers
and the high price,
we would never have survived.
>> The almond crop is
our fastest-growing,
most profitable export
crop here in California.
Every February, just
around Valentine's Day,
has become the single greatest
pollination event in the world.
Bees from the entire
country, far away
as New England, and Wisconsin,
and Minnesota, and Florida
get on trucks in the
middle of the winter,
and 3/4 of all bees in America
come to California to perform
this absolutely critical act,
where they have to be woken up,
strengthened with high
fructose corn syrup.
I mean if there's anything more
kind of viscerally offensive,
it's the idea of feeding
the creators of honey
high fructose corn syrup.
>> When we feed the corn syrup,
we hope that there's enough
natural nectar and honey on
the hive to supplement whatever
feed they get out of the syrup.
>> In Europe and America,
they are using a thing called
oxytetracycline, or
tetramycin in the sugar.
The bees consume
the sugar, and then
transfer it up into the honey.
Now, you eat that honey.
You eat that honey.
It's got oxytetracycline
or tetramycin in it.
And you then become
resistant to that antibiotic.
>> There is a 600,000 acre
monoculture of almonds
in the Central Valley.
Problem is that every
one of those trees,
every one of those blossoms,
needs a bee to visit it.
Yet, if there is nothing but
almonds in the Central Valley,
there is nothing to eat
for the bees for the 50
weeks of the year that the
almonds aren't in bloom.
So there essentially
are no bees around.
It's not sustainable.
Two or three years ago, there
were not enough bees in America
to pollinate the whole crop,
so the USDA gave permission
to the growers to import
bees from Australia.
Now, as it happened,
Australian bees
harbor certain viruses that are
unfamiliar to American bees.
Israeli acute paralysis
virus is one of them.
We brought that in to
pollinate the almonds.
That's where all the
bees of America mixed.
We've created this
great bee bordello,
as one beekeeper put it.
>> We constantly intermix
from all over the country.
So if they've got
something in one
part of the country
like tracheal mite,
and we don't have in
our part of the country,
we certainly will have it,
because the migratory nature
of beekeeping spreads all these
paths at a very rapid rate.
We don't have a single
event that causes
the bees to go way downhill.
It's a little bit here
and a little bit there.
These semi load
trips, I believe,
caused huge stress on them.
Once the hive starts getting
stressed to a certain point,
then it can no longer cope with
many of these other things.
And that extra stress is just
enough to put it over the edge.
>> So many of the problems we
face come down to one thing,
and that is monoculture.
There are many attractions
to monoculture.
It's efficient.
But from the point of view
of nature, it's insane.
And monocultures are the reason
that the bees are struggling.
And monoculture is the
original sin of agriculture.
>> Now, the trouble with
monoculture is it's an absolute
distortion of the way
an ecosystem works.
Because what you do
with a monoculture is
you take your vibrant
ecosystem, you destroy it,
and then you put in
place all the things
that you just took out.
So instead of having natural
fertilizers in the soil,
you add inorganic fertilizers.
Instead of allowing a natural
ecosystem around pests
to develop, you have
to use pesticide.
So what's the
connection with bees?
As far as the industrial
agricultural corporations
are concerned, the solution
that's being offered
is to destroy the insects
that make food possible.
And this is the disaster that
they ready to force on us.
>> It used to be a continuous
paradise for honeybees from
Pennsylvania all the way
through South Dakota.
The whole northern
part of the country.
But now there's just
huge, huge expanses
of other just mono crops
of corn and soybeans.
The fence rows are all gone.
The bees can't even
live there, and there's
not enough for the
bees to survive on
in a continuous cornfield.
They'll starve to death.
>> The German beekeepers and
our bees live in a very serious
situation.
Every two years we
have a disaster.
2002, 40% of the German
bee colonies died.
2006, 50% of the bee
colonies in America died.
Perhaps in the next years,
in these areas where
the agriculture is so intensive
could bring us in a situation
that the bees do not find enough
pollen and nectar in the area
for sustain themselves.
>> We are in such a
habit of exploiting,
of using nature
for our own ends.
And the honeybees
right now I think
are saying, if you continue
your ways, I'm withdrawing.
I've been a beekeeper
for over 30 years.
I knew something had to be
done to help the honeybees.
And here I was in my retirement.
It was in this moment
of utter hopelessness,
I had that feeling of urgency
to start this biodynamic farm
with a bee sanctuary
at its heart.
Land had to be found.
People had to be found
to come and help me.
And it was not easy.
You go on a great leap
of faith and trust.
I came to a moment
where I really
doubted that I could do
this alone with my wife.
And then at one point, things
more or less fell apart,
and it seemed like everything
I had worked for was gone.
Then the bees sort of
let me know, go ahead,
and we'll help you.
And a month later,
a wonderful donor
came for this purpose of
creating a honeybee sanctuary
on the biodynamic farm.
It's 610 acres that
were maltreated
like the rest of our land.
We are surrounded here in
the heartland by Monsanto.
Farms that are-- a
lot of them already
corporate-owned, and with
genetically manipulated seed.
These are, for the
insect life, deserts,
and there is no
forage for the bees.
They can't exist there.
So right now, we are
in this deep crisis
where we have to look at
the honeybee as a patient
in the emergency room.
And you don't demand of a
patient in the emergency room
that they perform and give
you a lot of something.
We are building up
here on Spikenard Farm
a biodynamic farm for the bees.
We are enlivening the
soil and we are enlivening
all that is growing here.
And it rays out into
the surrounding area.
>> From early humans on, we
were quite touched and impressed
by the way bees
can make honeycomb,
and by how exact
each cell is shaped.
They are all hexagonal.
>> The honeycomb is actually
part of their metabolic system.
They sweat out the wax
between their abdominal rings.
A honeycomb like this would
take approximately one million
of those tiny platelets.
>> They build chains of building
bees, and they follow gravity.
So this is exactly what happens
if you have a steel chain
and you pin it in two sides.
You get such a form.
And there are two
groups of bees.
One working here building this
part of the comb, another one
working here building this part.
And so this is where
they come close together.
>> The comb is the biggest
inner organ of the beehive.
It's their skeleton it's
the place they live on.
It is the womb for
all the baby bees.
It's the place where nectar
is processed into honey.
90% of their life
span is happening
on the comb in darkness.
>> What is amazing, wax is made
by bees that have never seen
the light.
But they have been
nourished by light.
Pollen is, so to speak,
materialized light.
And they have the ability
to free the light they have
ingested making snow white wax.
It is really a big wonder.
And then, man can collect
this wax, make candles,
and in the dark period of
the year, towards Christmas,
he can free the light again
from the wax in the bee.
For me it's kind of
a big imagination.
>> In the beehive, all the
individual members dedicate
their lives for
the bigger entity.
And sometimes I believe that
monasteries are actually
imitating a beehive.
There's this formalized
striving for selflessness,
for letting go of ego,
for the totality of life.
>> The workers are all females.
As a colony, these
30,000, 40,000,
50,000 female workers all
give up their sexuality.
They do not produce offspring.
And this renunciation
of their sexuality,
where they can then take care
of the queen in a wonderful way.
They clean her, and they feed
her, and they feed each other.
And they do that service of
work for the entire colony.
And all of it is for the
future, for the health
and the wealth of the colony.
>> We are entering the inners
of this being right now,
this moment.
This is one whole being.
The biological
term superorganism,
something which goes beyond
a single individual organism.
So those 20,000,
40,000, to 60,000 bees
are one undividable entity.
>> If you go a little bit deeper
into the biology of the bee,
you realize bees are a picture
of a harmony and coherence
according to exactly and
precise environmental contextual
situations.
You see, this bee is dancing.
And the direction it makes
tells the bees in what direction
they have to fly out
with respect to the sun.
And speed and
intensity of the dance
is an indication of how
good the food source is.
I start to see the
flight of the bee
like a golden thread
in the landscape
from flower to flower.
>> The relationship of bees
and flowers is one of the most
beautiful coevolutionary
relationships we have.
Bees are the legs of plants.
The great existential
fact of plant life
is the inability to move,
being rooted in place.
And the flowers have studied
the preferences of the bees
and learned precisely what
patterns, what smells,
what shapes are most attractive.
So how do you deal with
the need to move your genes
and expand your range?
Well, the genius of
flowers was to recruit bees
to do that for them.
And bees were their willing
collaborators in their desire
to move their genes around.
One of the great mysteries
of the world I think
is the fact that our taste and
bees coincide to the extent
that they do.
These are very
different species,
but what a bee thinks smells
good, we think smells good.
And that's not always true.
There are a lot of plants
that are pollinated by flies,
and those plants smell nasty.
Smell like decomposing meat.
Our canons of taste and the
bee are very, very close.
Beauty to a bee is usually
a beauty to a human as well.
[CHOIR SINGING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Industrial farming
is based on chemicals,
based on chemicals
that came from warfare.
They were designed
to kill human beings,
and of course they instantly
kill the pollinators.
The tremendous death of
bees that we are seeing
is the pesticides that have
been used very intensely.
>> It's a much bigger problem
than just agriculture.
The lawns that are sprayed is
so damaging to so many creatures
that are part of the food chain.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In Europe, except
more and more pesticide.
More and more and
more hives disappear.
The terrible thing is
the center of memory
of the hive is
destroyed by pesticide.
They can't discover
again colony.
Bees, they can disappear.
And this is the worst thing
that can arrive to humanity.
>> I was with my bees, and I
hear a noise of an airplane.
And all of a sudden, I see
that it is spraying something.
So when I realized that
insecticides or fungicides were
being sprayed, if the
drift comes over here,
my bees are damaged or gone.
When you see an airplane like
that coming and spraying,
there is this tremendous
feeling of not
being able to do anything.
You're just so vulnerable,
and all the beings
that are hit by it
are so vulnerable.
These are bees that
are a treasure for me,
and they're part of me.
And I don't want to lose them.
I really don't
want to lose them.
>> There are many people,
including a lot of beekeepers,
who suspect a relatively new
class of pesticides might have
a role in colony
collapse disorder.
Collectively, they're
called the neonicotinoids.
And it's true that they
are among the best-selling
insecticides worldwide.
These neonicotinoids,
which are neurotoxic,
they target the nervous system,
affect the ability of bees
to learn, and to remember,
and to navigate, all of which
would contribute to an
inability to return to the hive
after foraging.
Bees are gleaners.
Bees are particularly
vulnerable,
because they're really designed
to pick up small particles.
They're built to
electrostatically attract
pollen.
We recently discovered,
with the sequencing
of the entire honeybee
genome, honeybees
are distinctly
lacking enzymes that
break down poisons or toxins.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In Europe, bees are
completely dependent on human
care and on human help.
Without this care, many,
many bee colonies will die,
and only very few will
survive without the help
of the beekeepers
and all human beings.
In former times, the coal
miners had special birds
in the coal mines.
And when the canary birds
stopped singing and stayed
silent, it was time for the coal
miners to leave the mountain.
>> What most people
think of when they think
of a pollinator, is they
think of the honeybee.
And the honeybee is by
far the most important
agricultural pollinator we have.
But what a lot of people
don't realize is number one,
we have about 4,000
species of other bees.
Everything from
large bumblebees,
thousands of
species of bees that
are everything from little
bees, they look like flies,
to bright green,
fluorescent almost, green,
to striped in different colors.
Bees of all varieties
across the world.
Beyond bees, flies and beetles
are very, very important
pollinators.
>> The beauty of the seed is out
of one, you can get millions.
The beauty of the pollinator,
is it turns that one
into the million.
And that's an
economics of sharing.
That's, to me, the real
economics of growth,
because life is growing.
>> Without the pollinators,
we'd lose the plants.
They're just
completely codependent.
The pollinators wouldn't be
there without the plants,
and the plants wouldn't be
there without the pollinators.
>> We've seen a decline
in many of our bees.
With our native bees, we're
seeing declines, probably
from the same things.
Disease, to nutrition, to
potentially pesticides,
as well as habitat loss.
>> So if bees are dying, we can
be sure that butterflies will
be dying, solitary
bees will be dying,
bumblebees will be dying.
And we know from the point of
conventional academic ecology
that if insects are dying,
birds will be dying,
plants will be dying.
>> I think we're doing
some pretty scary things,
and the situation
is pretty dire.
And I think we're just beginning
to realize how dire it is.
But at the same
time, nature comes up
with all sorts of surprises,
and hopefully there'll
be some cheering surprises
rather than all gloomy ones.
>> These little
guys run the world.
These guys really
are the bosses.
They're doing all
of our work for us,
and without them, we'd
be in big trouble.
[BEES BUZZING]
>> This honey that I'm
collecting here at the moment,
here from the west coast of
South Island in New Zealand,
is some the cleanest
honey in the world.
I am a honey robber.
I steal their
honey, because what
they bring in is what
they use for the winter.
So we actually
steal their honey.
We actually rob their
honey, but leave enough
so the bees survive the winter.
I'm an organic beekeeper.
And the reason is mainly
what I believe in.
It's from the heart.
It's not from the
dollars point of view.
It's from the heart.
The bees are dying,
and I personally
think it's genetic modification.
I personally think that.
We're changing the
structure of the plant.
the structure of the plant
is being changed completely,
and the bees are
telling us that.
The bees are dying
because of it.
>> You take genes from
an unrelated species,
and shoot it into
the cells of a plant.
And there are only two ways you
can introduce unrelated genes.
The first is the use
of a gene gun, where
you shoot gold particles
laden with genes
and put them into the organism.
But it's a very
unreliable process,
so you also have to add
antibiotic resistance markers.
You also have to
add viral promoters.
And every genetically
engineered seed
is a bundle of bacteria,
toxins, viral promoters.
>> Genetically modified
organisms are planted
in millions of acres
around the United States.
Genetically engineered
crops can compromise
the immune system of bees.
One German scientist found
that when bees collect pollen
from corn, the genes that have
been inserted into the corn
end up transferring into the
gut microorganisms of the bees
and continue to function.
Unfortunately, human
beings also get
genes transferred to
their gut bacteria,
meaning it produces this
genetically engineered bacteria
inside of us.
>> When we start to
manipulate genetic material,
we are going to the
very deepest sources,
to the very deepest
layers of the human being.
It allows us to
be almost godlike.
But the question is, do we
have the wisdom, the morality,
the depth, to do
these interventions?
Are we really knowing
what we are doing?
Are we sure that what we do
will not have long-term effects?
And we are not experimenting
here with animals or plants.
We are experimenting
with the human being.
With the soul of human beings,
with the body of human beings.
Nature is very patient
for a long time,
but there is a moment
when things do collapse.
We have to wake up, and
hopefully wake up early enough
to make a change.
>> I became a beekeeper in
2003 under rather unusual
circumstances.
I'd been invited by the
local beekeeping association
to give them a talk on genetic
engineering in relation
to bees.
And one of them said, why don't
you come and look at our bees?
And then we opened some bee
hives, and that's what did it.
I was absolutely smitten.
One of the biggest
challenges to beekeepers
was the varroa mite, which has
now spread all over the United
Kingdom.
It's a little beast
that lives on the bee
and drinks its blood.
And beekeepers have found that
unless they treat their bees
with chemicals every
year, they will
be killed by the varroa mite.
I was taught the conventional
way of beekeeping,
and did all the
things that my mentors
taught me, which includes
putting chemicals in the hive.
The chemicals I started with
was a synthetic pyrethroid
called Apistan.
Clearly, one doesn't want
that sort of thing in honey.
I was going down a road
which didn't really
fit with my outlook.
In fact, if you get
the dosage wrong,
you get bee mortality from
the anti-varroa chemicals
that you use.
You are on a kind of
treadmill of putting chemicals
in the hives.
You're postponing the day when
the bee adapts to the mite.
>> In the process of trying
to kill the mites for so long,
and using so many chemicals,
we're breeding mites that adapt
faster and faster to every
new chemical we throw at them.
This deadly chemical coumaphos
has no effect whatsoever
on the varroa mite.
In fact, the varroa mite
treated with the coumaphos
did better by some measures than
mites that were not treated.
So in other words, a
chemical that was formerly
a deadly poison to them
is now somehow being
used as a resource.
They're becoming
stronger and stronger.
We've bred a race
of super mites.
>> I'm keeping the Warre hive
to see if the bees can survive
with varroa without any
intervention with chemicals.
This method of keeping
bees without any chemicals
runs the risk of going
for broke, definitely.
You could lose
all your colonies.
But if you are
interfering, you're
going against natural selection.
OK, this is a
Darwinian approach,
but the only other
alternative is
to stay on the treadmill of
giving chemicals year in,
year out, forever.
In this new type of hive, the
bee might be in a better home
to defend itself against the
ravages of the varroa mite.
I'm leaving the bee and
the mite more or less
to fight it out together.
And that is, I think, the
goal in long-term sustainable
beekeeping, is to let bee
and mite coevolve together.
[BEES BUZZING]
>> Phil?
Phil?
Philly?
Can you get me a jar?
There's some beautiful
honeycomb up here.
Thanks, Phil.
I'm going to put some
honeycomb in this.
>> Well, put it in the bucket
and send it down later.
I was nine when I
started beekeeping,
and I learned it from
my stepfather, Ian.
>> All right.
When Phillip first
started, he actually
pestered me into
keeping the bees.
He, at that point in time,
was the youngest beekeeper
in the UK.
>> Bees have a sort
of weird intelligence,
and they can do things that
humans can't, like walk upside
down.
It's kind of the
allure of Spider-Man,
but sort of like the
bad bit of Scorpion.
You kind of feel a
little bit of emotion
for the queens, who I have
named after various Queens
of England.
Some of the names of the Queens
are Queen Elizabeth I, Mary,
who is named after Bloody
Mary, because she's
one of the most vicious hives.
There's Queen Victoria, who
spawns almost all the time,
but is fairly stable.
>> This is what is stress-free.
Day at work.
Stand up here.
Look at my girls.
You see this little antenna?
It's lovely.
She's such a good girl.
Come on.
Back you go.
Oh, look at this.
And this is hackney in London.
This is what people can do.
People say that they
can't keep bees.
They're lying.
And look at that side.
Dripping with honey.
All these girlies, yeah,
these girlies here,
are putting everything
back into the environment.
Not me.
I'm just helping them.
And I just think
it is so rewarding.
>> The sun lets life
be created on Earth.
Without the warmth, without the
light, no life would be here.
The bees themselves
are sun creatures,
and the bees being
such great sun beings,
they are the nurturers
of life on Earth.
The queen, the most sublime
being in such a hive,
is deeply, deeply connected
with the sun forces.
When the young
queen emerges, when
she goes on her marriage
flight, she flies up
around 600 feet into the air.
She flies through
this swarm of drones,
and is mated by up
to a dozen drones
so that when she returns,
she has over a million sperm
in her.
And she can lay millions
of eggs over her lifespan.
And she can lay approximately
1,500 to 2,000 eggs a day,
which is more weight-wise
than her own body weight.
A tremendous feat,
if you consider
that she can lay more than her
own weight in eggs on one day.
>> I am a queen breeder.
I breed queen bees.
I'm doing this so that I can
be a commercial beekeeper so I
can make a living from bees.
Each one of those will have a
queen bee hatch out from it.
And the problem
with bee breeding
has always been this compromise
between inbreeding, which
is a way of fixing
certain traits so
that an entire line of
queens will all be similar,
but if you push that
process too far,
it ultimately weakens the bee
and you've lost the vigor.
And once you've lost vigor,
you've lost everything.
>> Modern queen breeding
has brought the quality
of the queen down to a level
where the queens nowadays
don't live four to five years.
They sometimes don't
live even one year.
So they are susceptible
to all kinds of illnesses.
So now we have to re-queen
practically every year,
because the queens
don't last long.
It's the same with a cow.
The cow, instead
of living 20 years,
has a life expectancy
of three to four years.
Not even one guaranteed calf.
>> There are parallels with bee
breeding and animal breeding.
Chickens' and pigs' genetic
stocks have been just weakened
terribly.
They have to be propped up.
I mean, almost literally
propped up even
to stand up so
that they can eat.
That's the direction
we're going in.
The biology of
honeybees is set up
to avoid inbreeding
at all costs.
And if bees are
inbred for very long,
they start to become weaker.
>> The artificial insemination
of queens is where a young
queen, a virgin
queen is knocked out.
Sperm is squeezed
out of some drones,
and the queen is
artificially inseminated.
The problem I see there
is that in nature,
the young queen goes
on a marriage flight,
and that's actually
the health of it,
that the queen will
breed with up to a dozen
drones of different varieties.
And here we are creating
another like a monoculture.
One stock.
And that stock is good
for a little while,
and then it doesn't have the
life forces that is necessary.
>> In the beehive, we can
actually see what happens if we
start to manipulate nature.
For a while, nothing much.
For 10, 20 years, it's
possible to do that.
But after 50, 60,
or 100 years, you
can see the effects
of such manipulation
very, very clearly.
It's very interesting that
in one of Rudolf Steiner's
lectures, he
recognized very early
on if we manipulate the bee
civilization on that level,
there will be a
long-term effect.
And we are reaping the
harvest we have sown.
>> This image of a queen in a
cage became a prominent image
for me in the play.
And the queen represents for
me the soul of the world.
I was looking into this
metaphor of the queen
in the cage, how bees were being
handled in the world today.
>> There's a queen
bee just there.
So we put her in a cage.
OK, the oldest one.
And I can send her away
and sell her to somebody.
>> All the queen bees in
cages are being exported
to the United States to build
up the colonies in the States.
This has degenerated the whole
strength of the bee colony.
>> We have to raise queens
again the natural way.
And this we have to
respect that nature
is much wiser than we are.
>> Oh, yes.
>> We live with our bees
in the bush and the forest.
We moved with them, and
you do become very in tune
with nature when you live
with them all the time.
And they have got some
magical, magical properties,
and magical things they do.
I think some of
it rubs off on us.
>> Well, my father
was a beekeeper,
and his grandfather had a
bit of a fiddle before him.
So I started sort of getting
stung at a pretty early age.
Building on the lids for the
hives there in the back yard,
with my mum.
I remember mum
tailing me, running up
the house screaming with
her head full of angry bees
stinging the hell out of you.
Easy, you just slap a
handful off like that.
Let's get some smoke
going pretty quick.
Just push it down in there a bit
till it gets a little bit going
and a bit of a puff.
Smell, smell the honey.
It's a bit odd today.
We don't have the
trouble in Australia
yet with the colony
collapse disorder
that they seem to be
having in America.
So I think you just create
such a big toxic load
that the bees have
had enough, flew away,
out the door they go and go
look for greener pastures.
In Western Australia,
the use of chemicals
is banned for the treatment of
hive diseases and parasites.
As a consequence, our
honey it's quite pristine
compared to other
parts of the world who
have to treat with miticides
et cetera, which must in
turn leach into the honey
and give you a contaminated
product.
This is a bit of fresh
West Australian nectar,
after one day, and
it's beautiful.
Beautiful, sweet,
light flavored honey.
Excellent for
toast and crumpets.
And yeah, just eat that all day.
>> In New Zealand, we have
this fantastic history
of beekeeping, because it's
very much part of a farming
community that involves
beekeepers and farmers working
together to have a whole
agricultural system that works.
The feeling for nature,
and for the bees, and that
has become very much connected
to my Maori connection.
In old societies, the beekeeper
was a very respected person.
He became someone
that was revered,
and someone that
was looked up to who
would bring in this sweetness.
Maori were very
much a people that
would watch nature
and watch insects,
and if they would
see changes in them,
these changes would
mean a lot to them.
And that would mean that
there would be changes
coming for them as well.
We're hearing stories
from America of bees
not coming back to their colony.
And for me to think that my
children won't have pollination
happening with their berries,
and with their vegetable
patches and food supply, I find
that really something that's
really affecting my heart.
And I'm really
finding out why I'm
beekeeping is to keep that going
for my children's children.
>> If bees leave this
world, I wouldn't like it,
because there would be
no honey and no fruit.
Because you wouldn't find any
peaches or apples these days
then.
>> My three daughters and
my wife are now coming out
into the field with me, and
that's an incredibly warming
feeling around the bees, is
to have a family business.
It's wonderful that
the kids can be
part of the financial
business-making,
and roll candles
for the girls to be
able to sell at the market.
>> All the wax that we make,
it helps us make get some money
to look after our ponies,
which are very special to us,
and we really like doing that.
>> So this is Lay.
She's 30 years old,
and she loves honey.
She's great.
She goes out and
wins competitions,
and she's healthy.
She's a good pony.
>> Look at that.
And still looking young.
>> Well, we had a pony that had
an electric fence that pulled
all his skin down, so we had
to pull it up like a sock,
bandage it with manuka
honey every day,
fresh manuka honey on every day,
and the whole thing has healed
completely.
And vets can't believe it.
>> I'm stung.
I'm stung.
And it's pumping the
toxin into my flesh.
You can see it moving.
I'm going to just give
you a demonstration how
to get them out.
So you'll just bend your
fingernail back like that,
and go--
cut it off.
The venom from the bee sting is
the same as rattlesnake poison.
So if you-- the
only thing is it's
only a little minute amount.
Rattlesnake bite can
kill you, but, well,
if you got enough bee stings,
it would kill you too.
>> Beekeeper, he can
receive 500 stings.
But more than 500, he can die.
So we have to be in very
deep respect about bee.
[SINGING]
To be a beekeeper
is a kind of art.
If you are a yogi,
if you practice yoga,
naturally you can
be a beekeeper,
because you have to be quiet.
You have to explore your soul.
Bees, life and death.
>> What's particularly
unfortunate is that honeybees
are often blamed for stings
that are inflicted by other
Hymenopterans.
To an entomologist, a
yellow jacket is a wasp.
It looks nothing like a bee.
Bees are sort of
brownish and fuzzy.
Yellow jackets are yellow
and black and shiny.
Different behavior,
different gestalt,
but the vast majority of
non-entomologists, people
are either unwilling to or
unable to differentiate.
So bees get a lot of bad
press that is undeserved.
>> Can you clip this
little branch there first?
>> This one right here?
>> Yeah.
>> It's about to go.
>> OK.
>> Oops.
>> A swarm, as much as
people don't like it,
is a natural way of procreation,
of guaranteeing that more
colonies of bees are there.
And at the right time when the
new queens are ready to emerge,
the old queen, with almost
half of the entire workers,
will leave the hive.
They swirl around in the
circumference of maybe 50 feet.
And then the queen
lands and alights
on maybe a branch, and the
rest of those swarm bees
gather in a cluster.
And they hang there
until they are either
taken by the beekeeper
or they find a new home.
So the commercial
or the average hobby
beekeeper prevent swarming.
And we have taken that
joy, that joie de vivre,
that wonderful invigorating
activity away from them.
For the honeybee to
regain her health,
I think we also have to see
that the swarming is allowed
again as much as possible.
>> When somebody calls, and
I'm on lists all over the place
for swarms--
oh, this is great--
I actually go to the hives
where people are freaked out
and they're afraid.
That to me is like,
uh-oh, hive in danger.
A lot of people call
an exterminator.
They really think that the
bees are going to attack
or something like that.
They're at their most
docile at that time.
Exterminators come
and they poison them.
I tell people that you're
seeing a miracle of nature.
This is a force of nature
come and landed on your tree.
Bee hive is just simply
moving to a new home.
The woman I was helping,
she had just taken my class,
and she didn't have
any bees before.
And often I say get a swarm.
Don't buy bees.
That's commercial.
That's cattle ranching bees.
And I invite them to come
with me on a swarm call,
and I help people get set
up with their first hive.
It's so wonderful.
Then they get to
handle the bees,
and they get to be with them.
It isn't just sticking them in
a box and letting them grow.
So they get to
interact with them
right from the very beginning.
You could see how
happy she was, and she
started singing with the bees.
She was feeling into them,
and she'll be a good bee mama.
>> I can't express it.
I'm just-- I'm
like a little kid.
It's like I got my first bicycle
or something, I don't know.
I'm just so excited to work
with them, and learn with them,
and yeah.
>> I wonder if bees paint.
And if they do, how?
>> My name is Wisteria, and
I'm a backyard beekeeper
in Portland, Oregon.
And we are building beehives
and painting bee boxes.
I've got my friends and family
and members of the Bee Project
here.
We're tasting mead.
>> Which is delicious.
It has a little bit
of a sparkle to it.
>> And just sharing with
families from Portland what
beekeeping is all about.
>> I'm a rooftop beekeeper
in New York City.
And I'm a third
generation beekeeper.
It's illegal here to keep bees.
It kind of scares me.
It worries me a little bit.
I really would like
to keep my bees.
We're really just trying to do
something simple for nature.
This is really a
crazy moment here.
As we're doing this,
there's a swarm of bees.
They look like they're
going into that tree
right there, which is not--
it's just completely bizarre.
I'm not sure where
they came from,
and they're coming closer.
It does look like there they are
sort of aiming right in there.
>> Yeah, they totally are.
>> That's crazy.
>> I've never quite
seen this happening.
>> I think you guys brought
that mojo, honestly.
Only in the Bronx, baby, are
you going to find a swarm.
>> Legalize beekeeping.
>> Give the bees a chance.
[CHEERING]
>> All we are saying
is give bees a chance.
>> Legalize beekeeping.
>> Give the bees a chance.
>> Beekeeping, the vital
practice of managing
and maintaining honeybee
colonies for pollination
and honey production, is a
banned practice in New York
City.
This ban is outdated
and detrimental
to the health and well-being
of our urban environment
and our community.
This bill needs
our support, and I
encourage you to call your city
council representative today
and encourage them to support
Councilman Yassky's bill.
>> One of my neighbors, probably
because they were uninformed
and scared maybe, reported the
hive to the health department.
And as a result, I was served
with a notice of violation,
and I have to appear at
a hearing in 15 minutes.
>> If she has a child, and
sees, as she pointed out,
this swarm of bees--
>> If beekeeping is done
properly, it's a safe activity.
This solves both problems.
Lets people who want
to do it, do it,
and makes sure
that those who are
going to engage in this
beekeeping do it safely.
>> So here we have a wonderful
opportunity to do what other
great cities have done.
Legalize bees, allow
for honey production,
whether it's on a tiny
rooftop or a small garden,
and build the sustainability
movement bee by bee.
>> --honey festival.
There will be tastings, and
jugglers, and demonstrations,
so you should definitely come
and pick up your local honey
there.
And all the restaurants
across New York City
are participating
in New York Nectar.
>> So I'm a beekeeper here
at the Center for Discovery.
I just had this sense that I
had this calling to do service.
So I'm at home.
I'm in heaven here.
One of the most amazing
things about the farm
is that we're working with
people with disabilities.
But by working with them
and integrating them
into our farm-raised
program, they really
become individuals
with abilities.
Nice work.
People with autism have this
innate affinity for nature.
And so by working outside,
they're just-- they're at home.
So when I think about
colony collapse disorder,
I really hope that
we can, as a society,
have a connection
with nature instead
of a disconnect with nature.
And one of the things that I
really enjoy about the bees
is that they all have this
really strong sense of mission.
It's not about
individual advantage.
It's not about getting ahead.
They take on different tasks.
Like they might start off
as a housekeeper, and then
a nurse bee.
Much like we have
different roles here.
We have integration specialists,
and skills trainers.
All sorts of people
coming together as a team
to provide a really
rich and meaningful life
for our residents here.
Our job is to create
a family for them
and to build a community that
they can really thrive in,
and where they can find
their own niche to really
be the individual
that they really are.
If you take a single
bee out of a hive,
it actually can't
live on its own.
It's biologically
dependent upon community.
And even though some humans
can survive on their own,
the individuals that we
take care of here cannot.
They really are dependent upon
a team of people coming together
to be of service to them, and
coming together in all humility
just like the bees do when they
take on their individual roles
in their particular
stage of life.
>> We have to care for
nature in the right way,
and nature will
care for us in turn.
So community is not
just a human problem.
It's a global problem.
Community with one
another and nature.
So human community is the
perfect training ground
for community with the
planet, with nature.
>> We keep bees
because we love them.
And we love them because
they need our help now.
Someone has to
take care of them.
And so the beekeeper's job
is to see that the bees stay
happy and healthy.
We now have three colonies
of bees in that garden.
The children are absolutely
relaxed in their presence.
Whoa.
>> A lot of bees there.
>> They're aware of the
problems of the honeybee.
So bees belong to be
all over the world.
And the great problem
now is they are not,
because we're creating
places where they can't live.
That's why we're doing what
we're doing here in the garden.
We're trying to show
you young people
how to put bees everywhere.
>> Colony collapse,
I've experienced it.
I'm an organic beekeeper
with the best of intentions.
I've gone to some
hives, and they're gone.
The problems are here.
They're everybody's
problem now, and we all
suffer the consequences of that.
Commercial beekeepers cannot
stop and reverse direction
without risking bankruptcy.
And an alternative to rolling
on the interstates 20,000 miles
a year would be to go to the
various monoculture productions
and simply tell them the
writing is on the wall.
One of these
springs, you're going
to call for
migratory beekeepers,
and they won't be there for you,
and you'll be out of business.
Why don't you take a small
portion of your holdings,
and plow it under and plant
it with bee-friendly crops
to sustain those
creatures all year long,
not just for three
weeks in the spring?
That way, you will know
what your situation
is, because they'll be there
right on your property.
>> The honeybee
belongs on every farm.
Turning this crisis around
is not going to be easy,
and it won't happen overnight.
Bees are telling us to
become true caretakers,
and the only
solution is creating
a surrounding of wildflowers,
and forage, and diversity.
Spikenard farm has been
not only a challenge,
but the variety of tasks for me
is just at times overwhelming.
You can't manage
everything alone.
And the help from other
human beings and other beings
has to come in.
Even in two years now, a much
greater variety of insects
are coming back.
It's very deeply satisfying.
And honeybee sanctuaries
are springing up
like mushrooms in this country.
People have asked me why do
you do what you're doing?
Do you have hope with
all the mess we are in,
with all we are doing in nature?
And I would say I would have
hope to the very last day,
to the last plant.
The bees are the most
exquisite beings.
They show us what this
service can be like.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Queen of the sun.
Queen of the hive.
Her love alone keeps us alive.
Queen of the sun.
Brings love and
light for everyone.
Queen of the sun.
Queen of the hive.
Her love keeps us alive.
There is magic in the honeycomb.
It starts with a seed,
and then becomes a flower.
Along comes a bee and
they dance for hours.
There's mystery in between,
in things we've never felt
or seen, but we are learning.
That's why the bees, that's
why the bees, that's why
the bees dream sweet nectar.
That's why the bees, that's
why the bees, that's why
the bees dream sweet nectar.
I feel like a bee, searching
for something sweet.
I'm finding just a little
bit in everyone I meet.
There's perfect orchestration in
this crazy, crazy, crazy world.
And I am learning.
That's why the bees, that's
why the bees, that's why
the bees dream sweet nectar.
That's why the bees, that's
why the bees, that's why
the bees dream sweet nectar.
They work all together
in symmetrical bliss.
There's something we humans
can surely learn from this.
And they're home.
And they're building sweet
honeycomb, and they drone.
And they build the sweet
as the comb in there.
Follow the bees and
find our way home.
Let's make a home
made of sweet nectar.
Let's find the light
that is eternal.